.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 2011 Bart Van Assche <bvanassche@acm.org>. All rights reserved.
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License, version 2 (GPLv2). 
.TH scstadmin 1 "July 2011" "scstadmin 2.0.0"
.SH NAME
scstadmin \- administer the configuration of SCST
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B scstadmin
[<OPTION>]* <COMMAND>
.SH DESCRIPTION
SCST consists of multiple kernel modules: the SCST core, SCST target drivers
and SCST device handlers. The state of each of these kernel modules is
configurable at runtime. Scstadmin allows query the current state, to modify
the current state, to save the current state to a file and to restore the SCST
state from a file. The relevant SCST concepts are:
.TP
.B device
An SCST device represents local storage that is exported via SCST. An SCST
device is either a local SCSI device (disk, CD-ROM, tape, ...), a block I/O
device like a disk or RAID controller or a file on a filesystem.  The SCST
drivers that control SCST devices are called device handlers.  Examples of
such device handlers are dev_disk, vdisk_blockio and vdisk_fileio.
.TP
.B target
An SCST target is an interface that allows a remote system to access the
storage exported via SCST. Each target is controlled by a target
driver. Examples of target drivers are iscsi_scst, qla2x00t, ib_srpt and
scst_local.
.TP
.B ALUA
An SCST setup can have multiple storage interfaces. A single SCST server can
be equipped with multiple interfaces or two SCST servers can have been set up
in a cluster. If there are multiple paths between an initiator and a target
system or target cluster then configuring ALUA (Asymmetric Logical Unit
Access) will make SCST to tell the initiator which path to use.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
<OPTION> is one of:
.TP
.B -debug
For commands that modify the SCST state, let scstadmin show which SCST state
information would be modified instead of performing these modifications.
.TP
.B -force
Let certain potentially dangerous operations proceed, e.g. closing a device
that is still in use or removing an initiator group that is still in use.
.TP
.B -nonkey
When writing a config file or listing attributes, include non-key attributes.
.TP
.B -noprompt
Do not prompt for confirmation before modifying the SCST state.
.PP
<COMMAND> is one of:
.TP
.B -h
Show usage information.
.TP
.B -help
Identical to -h.
.TP
.B -config <file>
Read and apply the specified configuration file.
.TP
.B -check_config <file>
Verify the syntax of the specified configuration file.
.TP
.B -write_config <file>
Save the current configuration to the specified file.
.TP
.B -clear_config
Remove all configured devices, targets that do not correspond to a physical
entity, dynamic target attributes, initiator groups, LUNs and dynamic driver
attributes. Disable all targets that correspond to a physical entity and
disable all target drivers. Note: static SCST core, target and target driver
attributes that have been modified are not reset to their default value unless
the corresponding kernel modules are reloaded.
.TP
.B -list_handler [<handler>]
If no device handler name has been specified, show the names of all device
handlers supported by the currently loaded kernel modules. If a device handler
name has been specified, list the names of the devices that use that device
handler.
.TP
.B -list_device [<device>]
If no device name has been specified, show the names of all configured
devices.  If a device name has been specified, show all attributes of the
specified device.
.TP
.B -list_driver [<driver>]
If no target driver name has been specified, list the names of all target
drivers supported by the currently loaded kernel modules. If a target driver
name has been specified, show the names of all targets that use the specified
target driver.
.TP
.B -list_target [<target>] [-driver <driver>]
If no target driver name has been specified, show all target names for all
target drivers. If a target driver name has been specified, show all
configuration information for the specified target. That information includes
the assigned LUNs and information about all initiator groups associated with
the target.
.TP
.B -list_group [<group>] [-driver <driver>] [-target <target>]
If either the target driver name or the target name has not been specified,
show information about all known target drivers, targets and initiator groups.
If a target driver name and target name have been specified, show
configuration information for the specified initiator group.
.TP
.B -list_scst_attr
Show name and value of all SCST core attributes.
.TP
.B -list_hnd_attr <handler>
Show name and value of all attributes of the specified device handler,
and also the names of all device creation attributes.
.TP
.B -list_dev_attr <device>
Show name and value of all attributes of the specified device.
.TP
.B -list_drv_attr <driver>
Show name and value of all attributes of the specified target driver.
.TP
.B -list_tgt_attr <target> -driver <driver>
Show name and value of all attributes of the specified target.
.TP
.B -list_grp_attr <group> -target <target> -driver <driver>
Show name and value of all attributes of the specified initiator group.
.TP
.B -list_lun_attr <lun> -driver <driver> -target <target> [-group <group>]
Show name and value of all attributes of the specified LUN. The LUN number
either refers to a LUN associated with a target or to a LUN associated with
an initiator group of a target.
.TP
.B -list_sessions
Show all active sessions for all targets.
.TP
.B -list_dgrp [<dgrp>]
If no device group name has been specified, show all defined ALUA device
groups. If a device group name has been specified, show configuration
information for that device group only.
.TP
.B -list_tgrp [<tgrp>] -dev_group <dgrp>
If no ALUA target group name has been specified, list the target groups
associated with the specified device group. If a target group name has been
specified, show configuration information for that target group.
.TP
.B -list_tgrp_attr <tgrp> -dev_group <dgrp>
Show a list with all ALUA attributes of the specified target group.
.TP
.B -list_ttgt_attr <tgt> -dev_group <dgrp> -tgt_group <tgrp>
Show a list with all ALUA attributes of the specified target.
.TP
.B -set_scst_attr -attributes <p=v,...>
Set the value of one or more SCST core attributes.
.TP
.B -set_hnd_attr <handler> -attributes <p=v,...>
Set the value of one or more device handler attributes.
.TP
.B -set_dev_attr <device> -attributes <p=v,...>
Set the value of one or more device attributes.
.TP
.B -set_drv_attr <driver> -attributes <p=v,...>
Set the value of one or more target driver attributes.
.TP
.B -set_tgt_attr <target> -driver <driver> -attributes <p=v,...>
Set the value of one or more target attributes.
.TP
.B -set_grp_attr <group> -driver <driver> -target <target> -attributes <p=v,...>
Set the value of one or more initiator group attributes.
.TP
.B -set_lun_attr <lun> -driver <driver> -target <target> [-group <group>] -attributes <p=v,...>
Set the value of one or more LUN attributes. The LUN number either refers to a
LUN associated with a target or to a LUN associated with an initiator group of
a target.
.TP
.B -add_drv_attr <driver> -attributes <p=v,...>
Add one or more new attributes to the specified target driver and set these to
the specified values. Which attribute names are valid depends on the affected
target driver. Adding the same attribute several times will cause multiple
values to be defined for that attribute.
.TP
.B -add_tgt_attr <target> -driver <driver> -attributes <p=v,...>
Add one or more new attributes to the specified target and set these to the
specified values. Which attribute names are valid depends on the involved
target driver. Adding the same attribute several times will cause multiple
values to be defined for that attribute.
.TP
.B -rem_drv_attr <driver> -attributes <p=v,...>
Remove an (attribute, value) pair from the specified target driver.
.TP
.B -rem_tgt_attr <target> -driver <driver> -attributes <p=v,...>
Remove an (attribute, value) pair from the specified target.
.TP
.B -open_dev <device> -handler <handler> -attributes <p=v,...>
Create a new SCST device using the specified device handler and attributes.
.TP
.B -resync_dev <device>
Update device size. SCST caches the size of devices controlled by the
vdisk_fileio and the vdisk_blockio device handlers. This command will not only
cause SCST to update the cached device size but will also cause any logged in
initiator to be notified about the capacity change event.
.TP
.B -close_dev <device> -handler <handler>
Remove the specified device from SCST.
.TP
.B -add_target <target> -driver <driver>
Add a target to a target driver.
.TP
.B -rem_target <target> -driver <driver>
Remove a target from a target driver.
.TP
.B -add_group <group> -driver <driver> -target <target>
Add an initiator group to the specified target.
.TP
.B -rem_group <group> -driver <driver> -target <target>
Remove an initiator group from the specified target.
.TP
.B -add_init <init> -driver <driver> -target <target> -group <group>
Add an initiator to an initiator group. <init> is either an explicit initiator
name or an initiator name pattern. The wildcard characters '*', '?' and '!'
are supported.
.TP
.B -rem_init <user> -driver <driver> -target <target> -group <group>
Remove an initiator name or initiator name pattern from an initiator group.
.TP
.B -move_init <init> -driver <driver> -target <target> -group <group1> -to <group2>
Move an initiator or initiator name pattern from one initiator group to another.
.TP
.B -clear_inits -driver <driver> -target <target> -group <group>
Remove all initiators from an initiator group.
.TP
.B -add_lun <lun> -driver <driver> -target <target> [-group <group>] \
     -device <device> -attributes <p=v,...>
Add a LUN to a target or initiator group.
.TP
.B -rem_lun <lun> -driver <driver> -target <target> [-group <group>]
Remove a LUN from a target or initiator group.
.TP
.B -replace_lun <lun> -driver <driver> -target <target> [-group <group>] \
     -device <device> -attributes <p=v,...>
Replace the device associated with a LUN by another device.
.TP
.B -clear_luns -driver <driver> -target <target> [-group <group>]
Remove all LUNs from a target or initiator group.
.TP
.B -enable_target <target> -driver <driver>
Enable a target.
.TP
.B -disable_target <target> -driver <driver>
Disable a target.
.TP
.B -issue_lip [<target>] [-driver <driver>]
Issue a LIP (Loop Initialization Protocol, fibre channel) for a specific
target or for all drivers and targets.
.TP
.B -set_tgrp_attr <tgrp> -dev_group <dgrp> -attributes <p=v,...>
Set one or more attributes of the specified ALUA target group.
.TP
.B -set_ttgt_attr <tgt> -dev_group <dgrp> -tgt_group <tgrp> \
     -attributes <p=v,...>
Set one or more attributes of the specified ALUA target.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B scstadmin -open_dev disk01 -handler vdisk_fileio -attributes filename=/vdisks/disk01.dsk,read_only
Lets SCST open the file /vdisks/disk01.dsk as a disk.
.TP
.B scstadmin -set_dev_attr disk01 -attributes t10_dev_id=0x2345 
Sets the T10 device id of SCST device disk01
.TP
.B scstadmin -add_group host01 -driver qla2x00t -target 50:06:0B:00:00:39:71:78
Creates a new initiator group called host01.
.TP
.B scstadmin -add_lun 1 -driver qla2x00t -target 50:06:0B:00:00:39:71:78 -group host01 -device disk01 -attributes read_only=1
Add a LUN to a group in read-only mode.
.TP
.B scstadmin -enable_target 50:06:0B:00:00:39:71:78 -driver qla2x00t
Enables target mode for the fibre channel HCA port with the specified WWN.
.TP
.B scstadmin -write_config /etc/scst-new.conf
Save the current configuration to the specified file.
.SH AUTHORS
The scstadmin software has been developed by Mark R. Buechler and also
contains contributions from Bart Van Assche.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Please send feedback about scstadmin itself or its documentation to the
mailing list scst-devel@lists.sourceforge.net. See also
https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/scst-devel for more information
about this mailing list.
.SH FILES
/etc/scst.conf
.SH "SEE ALSO"
scst.conf(5)
