.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 2011 Bart Van Assche <bvanassche@acm.org>. All rights reserved.
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License, version 2 (GPLv2). 
.TH scst.conf 5 "July 2011" "scstadmin 2.0.0"
.SH NAME
scst.conf \- Main SCST configuration file.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I scst.conf
is the main SCST configuration file. It contains information about the
configuration of the SCST core, device handlers, devices, target drivers,
targets, initiator groups, LUNs and ALUA configuration. This file is read and
applied by the
.BR scstadmin (1)
program when the SCST service starts.
.P
The format of the
.I scst.conf
file is as follows:
.br
- Blank lines and lines starting with a hash sign
.RB ( # )
are ignored.
.br
- All other lines either define an attribute, mark the start of a new section
or the end of a section.
.br
- An attribute definition consists of an attribute name and an attribute
value.
.br
- Attribute names consist of a sequence of letters, numbers and underscore
characters (_). Attribute names must not contain blanks.
.br
- An attribute name may occur several times in a section with different values.
.br
- Attribute values may contain blanks. Any attribute value that contains
blanks must be surrounded with double quotes.
.br
- A line that ends with
.BR { .
marks the start of a new section.
.br
- A line that contains nothing else than
.B }
marks the end of a section.
.P
The recognized section names and their arguments are:
.TP
.B "HANDLER <handler>"
Defines device handler attributes and also which devices are associated with
the specified device handler. <handler> is the name of an SCST device handler.
.TP
.B "DEVICE <name>"
Defines the name and attributes of an SCST device.  <name> is either a H:C:I:L
quadruplet referring to a local SCSI device or an SCST device name. A
.B DEVICE
section is a subsection of a
.B HANDLER
section. 
.TP
.B "TARGET_DRIVER <driver>"
Defines target driver attributes and also which targets are associated with
the specified target driver. <driver> is the name of an SCST target driver.
.TP
.B "TARGET <target>"
A
.B TARGET
section is either a subsection of a
.B TARGET_DRIVER
or of a
.B TARGET_GROUP
section. The former is the definition of an SCST target while the latter
is a reference to an SCST target defined on the local system or on
another system in the same cluster.
.TP
.B "LUN <number> <device name>"
Associates an SCST device with a target and defines its LUN number.
.RB "A " LUN " section is a subsection of a " TARGET " section."
.TP
.B "GROUP <group>"
Defines an initiator group with the specified name. A
.B GROUP
section is a subsection of a
.B TARGET
section.
.TP
.B "INITIATOR <ini>"
Associates an initiator name with an initiator group.  <ini> is either an
initiator name or a wildcard pattern matching zero or more initiator
names. The supported wildcard characters are:
.BR ! ", " * " and " ? ". An " INITIATOR
section is a subsection of a
.B GROUP
section.
.TP
.B "DEVICE_GROUP <dg>"
<dg> is the name of a group of devices that share ALUA settings.
.TP
.B "TARGET_GROUP <tg>"
Defines an ALUA target port group. A
.B TARGET_GROUP
section is a subsection of a
.B DEVICE_GROUP
section.
.P
An example:
.IP
# Sample SCST configuration file for scstadmin v2.0.
.IP
setup_id 0x1234
.IP
HANDLER dev_disk {
.br
	DEVICE 1:0:0:0
.br
	DEVICE 2:0:0:0
.br
}
.IP
HANDLER vdisk_fileio {
.br
	DEVICE disk1 {
.br
		filename /disk1
.br
		nv_cache 1
.br
	}
.IP
	DEVICE disk2 {
.br
		filename /disk2
.br
		blocksize 4096
.br
		removable 1
.br
	}
.br
}
.IP
HANDLER vdisk_blockio {
.br
	DEVICE blockio1 {
.br
		filename /dev/sda5
.br
	}
.br
}
.IP
HANDLER vdisk_nullio {
.br
	DEVICE dummy {
.br
		dummy 1
.br
	}
.br
}
.IP
HANDLER vcdrom {
.br
	DEVICE cdrom1 {
.br
		filename /cdrom1.iso
.br
	}
.br
}
.IP
TARGET_DRIVER scst_local {
.br
	TARGET scst_local_tgt {
.br
		session_name scst_local_host
.IP
		LUN 0 disk1
.br
	}
.br
}
.IP
TARGET_DRIVER iscsi {
.br
	IncomingUser "joe 12charsecret"
.br
	enabled 1
.IP
	TARGET iqn.2006-10.net.vlnb:tgt {
.br
		IncomingUser "joe 12charsecret"
.br
		IncomingUser "fred 12charsecret2"
.br
		IncomingUser "jonas 12charsecret3"
.br
		HeaderDigest CRC32C,None
.br
		enabled 1
.IP
		LUN 0 disk1
.br
		LUN 1 disk2
.br
		LUN 2 blockio1 {
.br
			read_only 1
.br
		}
.br
	}
.br
}
.IP
TARGET_DRIVER qla2x00t {
.br
	TARGET 25:00:00:f0:98:87:92:f3 {
.br
		enabled 1
.br
		LUN 0 dummy
.br
.IP
		GROUP INI1 {
.br
			LUN 0 blockio1
.br
			LUN 1 1:0:0:0 {
.br
				read_only 1
.br
			}
.br
			LUN 5 cdrom1
.IP
			INITIATOR 25:00:00:f0:99:87:94:a3
.br
			INITIATOR 25:00:00:f0:99:87:94:a4
.br
		}
.br
	}
.IP
	TARGET 25:00:00:f0:98:87:92:f4 {
.br
	}
.br
}
.IP
TARGET_DRIVER ib_srpt {
.br
	TARGET ib_srpt_target_0 {
.br
		enabled 1
.IP
		LUN 0 disk1
.br
		LUN 1 disk2
.br
	}
.IP
	TARGET ib_srpt_target_1 {
.br
		enabled 1
.IP
		LUN 0 disk1
.br
		LUN 1 disk2
.br
	}
.br
}
.IP
TARGET_DRIVER fcst {
.br
	TARGET 20:00:00:22:15:81:74:2b {
.br
		enabled 1
.IP
		LUN 0 disk1
.br
		LUN 1 disk2
.br
	}
.IP
	TARGET 20:00:00:22:15:81:87:f9 {
.br
		enabled 1
.IP
		LUN 0 disk1
.br
		LUN 1 disk2
.br
	}
.br
}
.IP
DEVICE_GROUP dgroup1 {
.br
	DEVICE disk1
.IP
	TARGET_GROUP tgroup1 {
.br
		group_id 1
.br
		state active
.IP
		TARGET ib_srpt_target_0 {
.br
			rel_tgt_id 1
.br
		}
.br
	}
.IP
	TARGET_GROUP tgroup2 {
.br
		group_id 2
.br
		state offline
.IP
		TARGET ib_srpt_target_1 {
.br
			rel_tgt_id 2
.br
		}
.br
	}
.br
}
.IP
DEVICE_GROUP dgroup2 {
.br
	DEVICE disk2
.IP
	TARGET_GROUP tgroup1 {
.br
		group_id 1
.br
		state offline
.IP
		TARGET ib_srpt_target_0 {
.br
			rel_tgt_id 1
.br
		}
.br
	}
.IP
	TARGET_GROUP tgroup2 {
.br
		group_id 2
.br
		state active
.IP
		TARGET ib_srpt_target_1 {
.br
			rel_tgt_id 2
.br
		}
.br
	}
.br
}
.SH KERNEL MODULE PARAMETERS
Some SCST settings cannot be configured via scst.conf but only as a kernel
module parameter. Parameters for an SCST kernel module can be configured in
/etc/modprobe.d/99-local.conf just like for any other kernel module. An example:
.IP
options ib_srpt use_node_guid_in_target_name=1
.SH FILES
.IP "/etc/scst.conf"
The configuration file read by 
.BR scstadmin (1).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
scstadmin(1), scst(5), modprobe.d(5)
