.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 2011 Bart Van Assche <bvanassche@acm.org>. All rights reserved.
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License, version 2 (GPLv2). 
.TH scst 5 "July 2011" "scstadmin 2.0.0"
.SH NAME
/etc/default/scst \- Configuration file read by /etc/init.d/scst.
.SH DESCRIPTION
/etc/default/scst is a configuration file read by the SCST startup script
/etc/init.d/scst. It contains zero or more variables that control the behavior
of that startup script. The recognized variables are:
.TP
.B ISCSID_OPTIONS
Specifies which command-line options will be passed to iscsi-scstd by the SCST
init script when SCST is started. This variable is ignored if no iSCSI target
entries have been defined in /etc/scst.conf. See also the iscsi-scstd man page
for more information about the supported command-line options.
.TP
.B SCST_TARGET_MODULES
This variable has only to be set when the procfs interface of SCST is being
used instead of the sysfs interface. It defines which target modules should be
loaded by the SCST init script when SCST is started and also which target
modules should be unloaded when SCST is stopped.
.P
The format of the /etc/default/scst file is as follows:
.br
- Blank lines and lines starting with a hash sign (#) are ignored.
.br
- All other lines must contain a variable definition using the syntax
<name>=<value>. If <value> contains blanks, it must be
surrounded with double quotes.
.P
An example:
.IP
.br
# iscsi-scstd command-line options. See also man iscsi-scstd.
.br
ISCSID_OPTIONS="-u0 -g0 -p3260"
.br

.br
# When using the procfs interface, the /etc/init.d/scst script
.br
# cannot derive from /etc/scst.conf which target modules will
.br
# be used and hence these have to be specified explicitly.
.br
SCST_TARGET_MODULES="scst_local iscsi_scst ib_srpt"
.SH FILES
.IP /etc/default/scst
Configuration file that controls the behavior of some aspects of
/etc/init.d/scst.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
scstadmin(1), scst.conf(5), iscsi-scstd(8)
